5 postures to read books perfectly
Bibliophiles can read a book, immerse in the story completely, and finish a book anywhere without even realizing that the experience could have been enhanced by the correct posture of sitting. Yes, a correct posture of sitting while reading a book can actually up your concentration levels leading to an active mind. 
Plus, a good posture is always beneficial for your sine. This will in turn make the act of reading the book more interesting. Here are some easy-to-follow postures that you could totally try while reading that exciting and intriguing book, starting today!
1. Sitting with the right leg height
When you are sitting on a chair to read your book, make sure your legs are placed correctly or else you can have a painful end! It is important that the blood circulation to your legs continues. So, make sure that the edge of your chair does not stop the blood supply to your legs. Your thighs should be parallel to the floor when your lower legs are perpendicular to the floor.
2. Support your feet
If you want to be seated in a relaxing posture, give your feet a platform to lift up. The more cushion you provide to your feet, the more relaxed you will feel. Probably your mind will also read better those intrinsic details of a scene.
3. Back your back
While you are sitting, a proper back support is a must. Hunching forward can surely lead to neck and a back pain leading to reducing your focus, concentration, and your reading time. So, if you want to continue reading the book seamlessly, please take care of your back.
4. Sit up straight
You should always keep your spine in a neutral position. This can be easily done by sitting straight up in your chair with your tailbone snug against the chair's back and keeping your feet flat on the floor. Slouching your shoulders or lowering your face to read should be avoided as the head weighs quite a bit and can cause some pain in the spine.
5. Eye Contact
It is advisable to bring the book up to meet the level of your eyes, which will help in keeping your back straight. You can support your elbows with few pillows.
6. Breaks
We need breaks from everything. Even while reading, try to give yourself a little break. Take small walks between your read, prepare some coffee or eateries or shake a leg, just anything that gives your body a break from sitting in one posture for a long period. This will also enhance your concentration as well as the curiosity to back to the story will be intact - making the read a more pleasurable one.
