India Is On The Greatest Toilet-Building Spree In Human History
The ‘Clean India’ initiative plans to build 111 million more household toilets by 2019.
India is on the greatest toilet-building spree in human history, and it’s a windfall for companies.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s $20bn (£15bn) “Clean India” mission aims to construct 111 million latrines in five years. Besides promising to improve the health, safety and dignity of hundreds of millions of Indians, the national hygiene drive has spurred an 81 per cent jump in sales of concrete building materials and 48 per cent increase in bathroom and sanitaryware sales, according to Euromonitor International. That’s benefiting firms from Tata Group, the nation’s largest conglomerate, to cleaning products maker Reckitt Benckiser Group Plc.
Almost 80 million household toilets are estimated to have been built since Modi’s 2014 pledge to ensure universal sanitation coverage by October 2019, which will mark 150 years since the birth of independence leader Mahatma Gandhi. The scaleup of latrines and a nationwide campaign to encourage their use is driving a market for toilet-related products and services that’s predicted to double to $62bn by 2021.
“It’s the biggest, most successful behaviour-change campaign in the world,” says Val Curtis, director of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine’s Environmental Health Group, who has worked on the programme in India. “Every time I go there, I feel like I can’t sit down for weeks after because I’m excited about what they’re doing. It’s incredible.”
Bollywood celebrity Akshay Kumar, star of the sanitation-promoting movie Toilet: Ek Prem Katha (or Toilet: A Love Story), was appointed brand ambassador this month for Harpic, the bowl cleaner made by Reckitt Benckiser. The UK-based company, which also sells the disinfectant Dettol, dominates the toilet care market in India, with sales climbing 11 per cent to $105.7m last year, Euromonitor data shows.
“We are one of the most trusted brands in India, and we’ve always managed to outperform the market with Dettol,” Rakesh Kapoor, Reckitt Benckiser’s India-born chief executive officer, said on a conference call in April. The company has been able to increase awareness of its cleaning products by working with open defecation-free communities and households to promote sanitation and hygiene.
