Ce Phan's post and comments about 'Vietnam from foreigners' perspective'
After sharing the article "Vietnam from a Briston's perspective" to Facebook along with my statement, Ce Phan received some good responses from his foreign friends. 
(Ce Phan's post with a question)
John Johnson: I definitely notice negative comments about Vietnamese on Facebook. It's not just Vietnamese though, although it is in the Expat forums. Look at the Trump or anti-abortion rhetoric. People often use Facebook as a way to anonymously voice hatred or negative criticism. Facebook doesn't have a monopoly on it, but it certainly is a big place for it. It's one reason I often use Reddit. Although lately I've been feeling to confrontational to get scared off by the bullies and trolls.
Ce Phan: I think that I get your point here. I often surf the homepage and stop at the "hot news" over there. So I think if I read more articles from a specific topic, I may find things different. But I don't like to see scandals, corruptions of a government ... I'd like to know more about "the normal stories". I mean that they are news about meaningful stories from workers, officers ..
John Johnson: OK, yes those are often called "human interest stories". I often have problems finding "good" news sources in my foreign languages. I grew up listening and reading things in English from my family, so I know where to go for what (mostly), but in Spanish and German, I often have problems going beyond main stream stuff. I recommend CBC (Canada), NPR (America), or even just Reddit's subReddit "World News" where you can scroll through multiple sources every day and find one you like.
Tom Christie: Facebook is more negative than positive even though its aim is to promote positivity, equality, diversity and inclusion. There are no trump supporters in my friends list. But this lady is warm hearted and positive alike to my friends views on vietnam. Unfortunately haters and negative people tend to share thier feelings and be more voiceful and people love drama.
John Pearce: I agree. Unfortunately, I think that a lot of it comes from a lack of empathy and an expectation that things "should be more like they are in the west."
Ce Phan: To tell you the truth that Vietnamese somehow treat others very strictly even for a small thing. For example, if i make a mistake in my English sentences, foreigners can skip or help me to correct it, but most of Vietnamese will mention it as a serious error and they may conclude to a wrong method that I am applying.
John Pearce: It's one thing for someone to respond negatively to a fellow countrymen; and something completely different to respond negatively when you are a guest in someone's country.
Ce Phan: do you think if it happens to your people when somebody make certain mistakes in their jobs or a kind of behavior?
John Johnson: I've had American coworkers in America who don't tolerate mistakes at all, some too much, and others in between. I don't really interact with my Vietnamese colleagues much, so it's hard to compare. I just teach and, even when we share a class, we don't often need to communicate much (if at all). I've certainly worked with other nationalities (notably Guatemalans, Mexicans, and Germans) though. 
That's not to say there aren't differences, but I think it's a slippery slope between comparing how work is done in a country and racist or bigoted judgments. 
One thing that often comes up is punctuality in Vietnam. Some say its culture and others say it's not culture. For me part of the question in what defines us as human beings, and particularly culturally, is whether we do things out of choice or out of convenience. Many Vietnamese are late because of poor infrastructure. There's overcrowding, traffic, bad maps, etc. Would they do otherwise if they could? I'm sure most would. 
Looking at it another way... here's a definition of culture from Circles of Sustainability, "The cultural is defined as a social domain that emphasizes the practices, discourses, and material expressions that over time express the continuities and discontinuities of social meaning of a life held-in-common."
Do Vietnamese express something when they come late? This topic has come in many times. The only time I've ever heard anybody say anything other than an excuse or apologize was a little kid who said that it wasn't a big deal because it was only a few minutes. When I explained that it was more than 30, he seemed to agree and get quiet. Usually, there is an apology and, even among Vietnamese, there seems to be a general consensus that punctuality is important. 
To make my point clearer, compare "being late" to "wearing ao dai". Ask a Vietnamese person why they wear it, what it means to them, and pretty much anything else. You'll get a much more fluid answer with specifics. The latter case expresses something, the former a lack of something. People are often late as a consequence of other actions; it's not an end product. So what's the point in calling it culture? 
To me, it serves as a way of explaining a much harder truth, that there are certain failings in society. Why are Americans so often obese? You can explain it away by saying "We love food!", but you fail to take into consideration how often we get exercise, our types of jobs, our use of cars, and our diet. How many Americans eat to being morbidly obese because they think it is who they are? How many Vietnamese are late because they think it is an important part of thousands of years of cultural heritage?
Likewise, when people drive, why are they so often assholes? If your answer doesn't include how incredibly crowded the streets are at least to some degree contributing to it, then you're really missing an important point. It might be that children are raised to care only about their immediate family, but then you get into a question of the fact that family is also often out on the streets too. Also, driving safely can reflect well on the family. What we perceive as being asshole behavior isn't necessarily so. I think most people would agree that someone who cuts you off because they don't care about you and someone who cuts you off because they think you aren't important are two different things. 
personal interest ≠ driving recklessly
However, there's no question that how families interact is important in understanding a people or people in general. If people put that sort of logical thinking into practice in other areas as well, I think the world would be a much better place.
John Pearce: Americans can be very unforgiving or very forgiving, depending on the person and the circumstance. Most people I know are harder on themselves than others. I do not understand the language here, so I can neither accurately nor fairly compare how Vietnamese treat each other vs. how Westerners treat each other. We use tone for emphasis and Vietnamese use it for meaning, so I frequently think someone is angry when they're not. Many, though not all, Westerners also use sarcasm, which does not seem to exist here (that opinion is based on the observation that when I'm sarcastic in a conversation with a native Vietnamese, I'm always taken literally).
