Problems with student behaviour
Poor student behaviour is a major problem faced by schools across the globe especially in the western world. This is due to (this can be attributed to) certain sociological and psychological problems that are encountered, while bringing up children. Both parents and teachers should play a responsible role in tackling(handling, solving, dealing with) this problem effectively. 
Parents today have too many responsibilities, other than (apart from) looking after the affairs of their families, which has resulted in children getting less attention and care. Parents need to inculcate (instill) good values in young children and discipline them at an early age, or else (if not) it would result indisruptive (unruly) behaviour at home and in school. In many instances, children are left alone in the company of television sets, computer screens and toys, andconsequently, (as a consequence, as a result) they fail to develop (lack)interpersonal skills and human values, which they learn by interacting with their parents and siblings.  
Furthermore, parents provide them with many material comforts, which can sometimes (may) make them selfish and greedy. Children who come from such family backgrounds (would) often create many problems for teachers and their schoolmates. Parents should never shy away from (shirk their responsibility of)spending quality time with their children on a regular basis, which would help them to monitor their children's behaviour and give suitable advice whenever there is a need. 
Another reason for problematic behaviour among children is that teachers lack effective training in dealing with children who have various behavioural and psychological inadequacies (problems). Children, who come from broken or problematic families, in order to ventilate their frustration, often create problems in schools, which can only be tackled by trained teachers or counsellors. Many teachers become defensive and show little tact when children show suchbehavioural abnormalities. Erratic handling of such problems can result in (lead to) aggravating the issue. I believe that this problem can be effectively addressedif parents and teachers are trained in scientific ways of dealing with children. Schools should appoint specially trained counsellors, who can assist teachers in dealing with problematic children. 
As mentioned above, both parents and teachers have a crucial role to play in normalising the behaviour of children in schools. Scientific ways of handling children with troublesome behaviour can go a long way in dealing with them efficiently. 
