Educators argue about possible Facebook ban
The Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) does not prohibit students to use Facebook, but the ban has been issued by many schools.
Trang said she is on Facebook for two or three hours a day, mostly after school hours.
“There are many things you can do on Facebook – chatting with friends, sharing your feelings or complaining about your problems,” she said. “You can also discuss lessons with friends and communicate with many people at the same time, while you don’t have to pay money for this. Meanwhile, it would take you much time and VND300 million to send an SMS.”
Nham Si Minh, a seventh grader at the Quynh Mai High School, also said that he likes ‘wandering’ on Facebook where he can ‘exchange information, show off new clothes or shoes to friends’.
Minh said he understands the ‘dark side of Facebook’. However, he still thinks that Facebook is indispensable for students, and the little problems must not be the reason for educators to prohibit its use.
Pham Thuy Hien, a ninth grader at Nguyen Dinh Chieu Secondary School, admitted that she once showed her discomfort with other girls on Facebook, which then led to serious quarrels and nearly a fight. 
However, she said one can find on Facebook not only inconvenience, but also joys.
“Facebook has been very helpful to our study,” she said. “It also gives us the space to relax. I feel happy when the pictures I post on Facebook receive ‘likes’ from friends,” she said.
What if students are asked not to access to Facebook for one day? Minh Hang, a student of the Minh Khai Secondary School said she will feel uncomfortable as if she does not have food to eat and air to breathe.
Should Access to Facebook be prohibited?
A female 12th grader at the Le Loi High School in Hanoi has been suspended for 10 days after she showed her doubts about the head teacher on Facebook. Prior to that, in 2013, a female eighth grader was also disciplined for insults to her teacher on Facebook.
This has triggered a debate on whether to prohibit students from using social networks. 
Lai Thi Nguyet Hang, headmaster of Nguyen Phong Sac Secondary School in Hanoi, said schools will violate human rights if they prohibit students from accessing Facebook.
Meanwhile, Le Thanh Hai, a 10th grader of Dong Kinh High School, said it would not be useful to prohibit students from using Facebook.
“We can access Facebook through many different ways. This will be impossible,” he said
