How expensive will Vinamilk shares be?
The price of Vinamilk shares at which SCIC sells at its initial public offering are expected to be higher than the market prices, or prices on the official bourse. 
Japanese investors have shown great interest in Vinamilk. At that time, when the ceremony took place, Decree 60 on allowing foreign investors to hold up to 100 percent of stake in Vietnamese businesses had not been released. However, they still hoped more room in Vinamilk would be offered to foreign investors.
As soon as the government announced it would sell all of its Vinamilk shares, investors cast their eyes on SCIC.
Until the disinvestment was announced, SCIC still had insisted on long-term investment in Vinamilk. As the largest shareholder, it had rejected all plans to issue additional shares to reduce the state’s ownership stake in Vinamilk.
Lai Van Dao, general director of SCIC, interviewed on national television VTV some days ago, discouraged investors by saying that SCIC had not made a decision on the time of divestment.
He mentioned the possibility of selling 10 percent of Vinamilk shares in the initial offering, saying that shares may be sold under the negotiation mode rather than through the stock market. 
If so, Vinamilk shares could go for better prices because the principle of price band of +/- 7 percent will not be applied to the transactions.
“Ten percent of Vinamilk stake will be worth more than VND10 trillion, which is really a big amount of money,” Dao said.
In fact, foreign investors have been trading shares among them under their negotiations rather than making transactions on the bourse. 
In most cases, Vinamilk shares can be sold at the prices 10-15 percent higher than the stock market prices.
“Is this all what SCIC can think of ?” an analyst asked after hearing about the negotiation-based mode of share sale.
“There are thousands of other methods which are more transparent that SCIC, as the seller, can apply to optimize its profits when selling Vinamilk shares,” the analyst said.
When issuing $1 billion worth of international bonds, the Ministry of Finance hired international financial institutions as consultants and organized many roadshows in the world’s financial centers to popularize the bond issuance. 
Therefore, the analyst commented, the state has every reason to launch similar campaigns when it sells Vinamilk shares, which are believed to be worth at least $2.5 billion. 
