Vietnamese firm to manufacture nuclear power equipment for South Korea
Doosan Vina Heavy Industry has signed a contract on manufacturing nuclear power equipment for a South Korean nuclear power plant, the first ever contract of this kind.
Under the contract, signed on August 4, Doosan Vina will make four tanks, including two reactor drain tanks and two acid boric batching tanks to provide to the 1,500 MW Shin Kori nuclear power plant in Busan City, South Korea.
These will be the first nuclear power equipment made in Vietnam. Doosan is one of four members of the group of contractors in charge of power generation units No 5 and 6 of the plant.
Doosan Vina, in a press release, emphasized that in order to obtain the contract on making hi-tech equipment, Doosan Vina had to go through a very strict examination process and satisfy the quality management procedure in accordance with ASME’s standards (the American Society of Mechanical Engineers).
Yeon In Jung, general director of Doosan Vina, called this a ‘historical event’ because these will be the nuclear power equipment to be manufactured for the first time in Vietnam by Vietnamese engineers, workers and resources with materials from Doosan holding company in South Korea.
Commenting about the ‘made in Vietnam’ products, experts said these are just small items of the systems needed to operate power generation units, and by nature, are just outsourced products. 
According to Nguyen Mong Sinh, former deputy head of the Da Lat Institute of Nuclear Research, these are technical supporting equipment for the subordinate systems of nuclear power generation units.
“The tanks are one of the heat exchangers, a component technically supportive for a systematic part of power generation units,” he explained.
The technical item is not the most important part which affects the operation of power generation units.
However, he is optimistic about the contract.
In principle, all the equipment to be used in the plant must undergo strict technical tests to ensure standard quality. This means that when a South Korean company uses products made in Vietnam, it must have confidence in the quality of the products.
Sinh said it would take Vietnam a long time to master nuclear power technology and it should start from outsourcing works.
Le Van Hong, former deputy head of the Atomic Energy Institute of Vietnam, emphasized that all the systems in nuclear power plants are important because they play roles in the operation of the plant and must meet standards in order to work with other systems.
