Our Bitcoin Predictions for 2018 – Don’t Expect More of the Same
2017 has undoubtedly been Bitcoin’s year, with the world’s best-known virtual currency generating more press coverage and controversy — and consuming more fiat value — than ever before. 
The wild ride saw both an unprecedented 20-fold price increase from the start of 2017, but also an ideological split. 
All the attention resulted in many newcomers (and former naysayers) joining the crypto industry. But where does it all go from here?
Price
Crypto watchers predict BTC’s price to keep fluctuating in 2018. Throughout the world, the cryptocurrency industry has broadened way beyond just bitcoin as well, due to exponentially high returns on investment.
Some cryptocurrency-friendly investment analysts have predicted the BTC price in 2018 will reach somewhere between $25,000 to $40,000 USD. 
However, wilder proponents have valued the currency to soar as high as $1,000,000. Crypto influencer John McAfee envisions BTC price to reach between $500,000 and $2 million by 2020. Or else.
Last time virtual currency saw such a price surge was in 2013 when BTC grew 85-fold. However, the following year its market collapsed.
It was only in 2017 that it stepped back into the limelight, with big financial players supporting bitcoin and its entry into the mainstream.
2017 was also a good year for crypto exchanges around the world. According to CoinMarketCap, the overall crypto market cap has surpassed half a trillion dollars. 
But despite its 20x price gain, BTC actually finishes the year with only a 38 percent share of total crypto market value — its lowest level ever.
Expect More Regulation
The coming months will definitely be crucial for cryptocurrency and its advocates. Bitcoin’s entry into traditional markets like Cboe and CME with Bitcoin Futures is a plus point.
However, at the same time, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission – that regulates the securities industry, warned investors of “substantially less investor protection than in our traditional securities markets, with correspondingly greater opportunities for fraud and manipulation.”
Future prosperity depends on several factors, of which the key is the regulatory environment around the world. Moreover, the G20 summit in April 2018 will also play an important role in sketching the roadmap.
Governments have long been concerned about bitcoin’s role in tax evasion, money laundering and organized crime. 
Expect further KYC identification requirements and greater interest into users’ everyday financial affairs as a result.
The Cost of Using BTC: Fees and Electricity
Another factor that could decide bitcoin’s fate is its transaction fee, which has gone up in much the same style as the BTC price. 
The price oscillation also has caused many investors to stop trading in BTC — and many merchants to stop accepting it.
To avoid the regular accusations of excess power consumption, many bitcoin miners are moving towards green energy that serves the purpose — an environment-friendly crypto ecosystem. 
The recent move by Japanese Internet leader GMO, that plans to use available renewable energy to run its mining operation, could be the start of a wider trend.
The Future of Bitcoin Is Complicated
Bitcoin’s Fate, Unfortunately, Is Still in Governments’ Hands
‘Blockchain!’ (to the Tune of ‘Monorail’)
Conclusion: Bitcoin Will Transcend This Realm
