SMB Market Lead, Vietnam
Facebook's mission is to give people the power to share, and make the world more open and connected. Through our growing family of apps and services, we're building a different kind of company that helps billions of people around the world connect and share what matters most to them. 
Whether we're creating new products or helping a small business expand its reach, people at Facebook are builders at heart. Our global teams are constantly iterating, solving problems, and working together to make the world more open and accessible. Connecting the world takes every one of us—and we're just getting started.
The SMB team contributes directly to this mission by connecting every small- and medium-sized business in the world with their customers on Facebook, and then helping them grow through solutions like pages, advertising, and offers. We succeed when we help our customers grow their business. 
This position will be directly responsible leading a team of Account Managers and Partner Managers who help clients get the best results from their marketing campaigns on Facebook – through consultation, education, optimization, and support.
In addition to developing a high-performing team, this position will be responsible for working with other teams across Facebook to create and grow programs focused on improving the Facebook experience for our clients. 
Ideal candidates will combine an exceptional ability to coach, develop, and motivate team members; a passion for growing revenue through rigorous account planning and consultative sales techniques; a keen eye for identifying process and workflow opportunities; and a willingness to roll up their sleeves and execute the tactics. 
Success in this position requires strong sales, people management, and problem-solving skills; attention to detail; the ability to thrive in a dynamic and changing environment; and a passion for helping others achieve results. This position is full-time and located in our Singapore office and will support Viet Nam market.
