Hanoi to build intelligent transportation system
Hanoi People’s Committee has approved FPT Corporation’s project on building an intelligent transportation system (ITS) in Hanoi.
A crowded area in Hà Nội. The city’s People’s Committee has approved the FPT Corporation’s project on building an intelligent transportation system in Hà Nội. 
ITS is a combination of advanced technology and transport infrastructure to manage and operate the transportation system.
It includes a control centre, traffic monitoring systems, collection and traffic information, as well as security, safety, and emergency management systems.
According to the proposal by FPT’s Information System Company, four items will be deployed this year, beginning in June -- traffic monitoring and collection, traffic information, traffic management system and public passenger transport management system by bus.
The first phase of the project will be completed and begin operation by December.
In terms of financial options, FPT has proposed a plan to city authorities to hire information technology services in 2017 to quickly form the basis of the ITS.
FPT will be responsible for investment in the system, ensuring operation and maintenance. During the second phase from 2018 to 2020, the project will be implemented under the form of a public-private partnership.
The smart system will help the city provide a variety of solutions to improve the quality of transportation, including reducing congestion, accidents and pollution, and providing information to vehicle users in a more efficient manner.
In another move to improve transportation in the city, the Department of Education and Training is coordinating with the Hà Nội Transportation Corporation to survey the demand for buses for primary to high school students.
According to representatives of the corporation, the survey was conducted in 12 districts of the inner city and Gia Lâm District.
Basing on the survey, the corporation will prepare a plan to pick students by bus following their families’ demand.
Buses will pick students at fixed locations and times and use smart card tickets for better management.
Phạm Xuân Tiến, deputy director of education and training department, said the bus route will be opened to meet demand of students in each area.
It will be implemented in the 2017-18 school year if the project is approved by the city’s leaders.
Tiến said the move will help address traffic problems, ensure safety of children and reduce congestion, accidents and travel time. 
