Most banking to move online within a few years
Beautiful bank officers and luxury rooms with air conditioners will no longer be attractive to Vietnamese customers in the future, when they can stay at home and make transactions through e-banking.
The days before Tet holiday are always busy for bank officers because there are numerous requests from customers who have to queue up and wait hours for their turn. 
However, many customers now prefer making transactions online and transaction offices have become less crowded.
Tam said e-banking services allow people to make transactions from anywhere, at home, at a café or overseas, and at any time. 
If people want to give lucky money to relatives on Tet days, they can do this with e-banking service, both Internet Banking and Mobile Banking, through personal accounts or cards.
The service allows people remit money at any time including Tet days, even if the recipients don’t have a bank account or bank card. 
Meanwhile, if someone travels during Tet and his Visa card runs out of money, he can expect support by asking relatives to remit money from bank accounts to Visa cards issued by any bank through Sacombank’s electronic banking.
A senior executive of a joint stock bank in Hanoi said that with the modern e-banking technology being applied in Vietnam, making payments for electricity, water, Internet and cable TV with mobile devices is within reach as the services now can be provided by most banks, while e-bank services ‘do not have Tet holidays’.
The banker went on to say that the payment technology has entered a new development stage. Making payments with cards has become popular because people feel safer to use cards than cash. 
A banker predicted that in three to four years, the face of e-banking would be different, saying that digital banking would not only lead to big changes in the banking sector, but the whole society. 
By that time, all personal electronic devices, from watches to smartphones, from tablets to TVs, can handle bank transactions.
