iPhone 5S still bestseller in Vietnam
iPhone 5S, a smartphone launched three years ago, was among the bestselling phones in the last six months in Vietnam.
The reports from the largest mobile phone distributors show that about 3,500 iPhone 5S products were sold last week, higher than any other smartphone model with the same price level.
The number of sold iPhone 5S was even higher than Sony Xperia XA which has just been launched on the market. It was also 50 percent higher than the sales of Samsung’s famous Galaxy A5 and A7.
A representative of a distribution network said that iPhone 5S was a mid-priced smartphone model with the most stable sales in the last six months. 
With the price decreasing from VND7.99 million to VND6.99 million, analysts believe that iPhone 5S would be even more attractive to buyers.
It’s not a surprise to Vietnamese that Apple’s previous-generation products still sell well in Vietnam. The same thing happened with iPhone 4 and iPhone 4S.
Unlike the other phone manufacturers, Apple does not intend to market products with lower prices. Instead, it keeps previous-generation models and cuts prices step by step once it prepares to launch new models.
There are a lot of mid-tier smartphone models which have modern design and stronger configuration than iPhone 5S and the selling prices equal to or even lower than iPhone 5S. Some high-end models such as Lumia 950, and Motorola Moto X Style have also lowered their selling prices.
Analysts said the iPhone 6 would be sold for VND7-8 million in the future like iPhone 5S.
iPhone 5S was marketed in September 2013. The first iPhone 5S available in Vietnam caused buying fever. The version with fashionable gold color was once priced at VND52 million. The distribution of iPhone 5S through official channels in Vietnam began in November 2013 with the selling price of VND17.6 million.
The small 4-inch screen is what Vietnamese users most complain about iPhone 5S. Mai Trieu Nguyen, Director of the Mai Nguyen network, said iPhone 5S uses A7 chip which allows the processor speed to be higher by five times, provides fingerprint recognition security solution, f/2.2 flash, stronger flash.
“If the iPhone 5S had larger screens, they would be more perfect,” Nguyen noted.
