What if Nokia’s return is successful? 
Nokia plans to target the mid-tier and low-cost market segments, which analysts believe will threaten the dominance of Oppo in the Vietnamese market.
Nokia products, with high quality, durability and good post-sale services, had been favored by Vietnamese consumers until 2014, when Nokia was transferred to Microsoft in a $7.5 billion deal. 
Many Vietnamese are excited about the news that Nokia will return to the market by HMD Global Oy, a Finnish company.
Nguyen Le Hao in Go Vap district in HCM City said the high quality of Nokia products is undeniable. “Your Nokia phone will still run properly even though you drop it several times. Meanwhile, the other phones with flashy appearance will get broken down if you drop them once,” she said.
Ngo Dieu Quang, the manager of a FPT shop in Tan Phu district, commented that the majority of Vietnamese have low or medium incomes, and Nokia products fit their pockets. 
Second, for those people who work in the open air, mobile phones need to be easy to use and durable. Nokia products are the best option for people as they can satisfy both requirements.
This is why Microsoft, which took over Nokia, could not develop phone manufacturing. Its Windows phone was difficult to use.
Vo Thi Tham, a small merchant in district 3 of HCM City, said her income was high enough to afford an iPhone and she now has an iPhone 6, but she would buy a Nokia if the brand comes back.
“An iPhone is a valuable asset. It is for you to eye, not to use,” she said.
Analysts believe that upon its comeback, Nokia will declare war with Oppo, the brand which has been dominating the low-cost and mid-tier market segment over the last three years.
Oppo now targets young consumers who like selfies with good back and front cameras.
Oppo has cemented its position in the market with many professional media campaigns. 
However, with its fame, analysts believe that Nokia will be a strong rival to Oppo.
Oppo products are now priced at VND3-7 million, and are offered under installment purchase with initial pay of zero dong.
According to Quang of FPT Shop, Oppo now uses mediate chip. If Nokia comes back with Android models and ST-Ericsson chips as it used for Windows Phone before, it will have advantages over Oppo.
