Concern as high-rises pop up along Da Nang beaches
Many developers are seeking permission to build apartment buildings of 40-50 floors, setting off alarm bells
The construction site of a beach project in Da Nang. Photo credit: Tuoi Tre
At least two architects have raised concern about the central city of Da Nang's urban development plans after it was revealed that real estate developers are scrambling for licenses to build high-rise apartment buildings along its beaches. 
Hoang Quang Huy, chairman of Da Nang's Urban Planning Association, told Tuoi Tre newspaper Thursday that though skyscrapers are crucial for a modern city, local authorities must carefully consider ones planned on beaches. 
City authorities should not rush into licensing the projects, or they would find themselves facing problems such as infrastructure being strained by a rapidly growing population in those areas, he said. 
Earlier city chairman Huynh Duc Tho had told a meeting that many coastal resort and hotel developers have been seeking permission to build apartment buildings with 40-50 floors, according to the newspaper. 
Costing just above VND1 billion (US$44,000) on average, the apartments target both locals and people from other provinces and cities, he said, warning any influx of new residents could complicate the city's security situation. 
He has ordered the construction department to carefully review the issue, Tuoi Tre reported. 
Bui Huy Tri, chief of the city’s urban planning office, too was cautious about the new trend. 
Da Nang authorities have never made their stance on coastal high-rises clear, but it is completely unadvisable to build apartment buildings along its beaches, given that Da Nang plans to become a tourist city, Tri said. 
He criticized three apartments being built in the coastal Son Tra and Ngu Hanh Son districts, saying that local transport infrastructure would be overwhelmed with the arrival of new residents who buy the apartments. 
One the three projects in question is a hotel-apartment complex consisting of three buildings as high as 40 floors in Ngu Hanh Son District, Tuoi Tre reported. It is expected to be house around 4,000 residents when finished. 
A similar complex is being built nearby with 30 floors, while the third one would have 41 floors, the newspaper said. 
