Merry Christmas Vietnam!
Have you ever wondered why a lot of people fuss about Christmas? This festival which falls at December 25 annually is one of the happiest and most widely-celebrated holidays all over the world, hence the song "It's the most wonderful time of the year." 
It’s a season to be jolly, not just for kids but equally so for adults. Christmas trees of different sizes designed glamorously, bright and colourful Christmas lights arranged spectacularly, sincerely-picked gifts wrapped meticulously, heart-warming Christmas carols played either joyfully or soothingly, and household doors and windows decorated cheerfully are visible signs that Christmas is already around the corner. 
More important than these material decorations though is the joy that Christmas brings to the hearts of those who celebrate it. It’s usually a time for families to come together, for friends to catch up on each other and for enemies to forgive each other. Generosity is also one of the distinctive sensations during this season as people make an effort to share their blessings by giving gifts to the people they love.
Although most countries around the world await to celebrate these holiday season, several nations take it as a regular day, including Vietnam. But where did this festival come from and how did it become so popular that most countries around the world observe and look forward to it? 
Well we can trace it back to around 2050 years ago in the country of Israel in the Middle East, at a time when Jewish people were under the rule of the Roman Empire. The Jews or Hebrews are the same people for whom God performed miracles such as parting of the Red Sea and making the sun stand still in the sky for more than a day, which are popular stories from an ancient book called the Bible. During Roman oppression, they were waiting for the realization of a prophecy which says that a Saviour will be born to save them. After hundreds of years of waiting, the prophecy came true when a virgin young girl named Mary conceived the Son of God, who was to be named “Jesus”. Mary gave birth to him under difficult circumstances, where she had to lay him on a manger, which is where animals eat their food! His birth is narrated in the Bible at Luke 2:1-20 which you can easily find from Bibegateway.com.
Jesus’ name means “Saviour” and it is usually followed by the word Christ which means “anointed.” According to the Bible, Jesus Christ offers salvation not just for the Jews but also for all people around the world who would believe in him. People who do are called CHRISTians. And that is also where “CHRISTmas” came from. 
So that’s the truth behind the colourful, bright and grandiose Christmas day! It is to celebrate the birth of Jesus Christ, whom God generously gave to humanity because of his love for his creation. At the end, Jesus sacrificed his life when he died on a cross, 2017 years ago, so people can be forgiven from their sins against God. 
That is the reason why Christmas has a spirit of “giving” and “forgiving.” So after all, it’s not Santa Claus, snowman, nor Rudolf who is the star of Christmas, but Jesus Christ.
