Central VN enters peak time of preparing Tet flowers, fruits
People in the central region have prepared many types of flowers, fruits and ornamental plants for the Lunar New Year festival which will come in one month.
A kumquat pot worth VND35 million (US$1,541) of Mr. Nguyen Viet Ninh in Hoi An city, Quang Nam province (Photo: SGGP)
Some gardeners have planted bonsai and ornamental apricot trees in Hao Duc village in Nhon An town, Binh Dinh province.
Fifty year old Nguyen Van Minh from the village said that besides 3,000 traditional apricot pots, he and friends who are apricot growers have established an artistic apricot blossom association.
His garden now has 1,000 pots of artistic apricot blossom trees with diversified designs. Mr. Minh said he did not afraid of losses investing in these products as they could be sold this year or following years.
Cam Ha commune, Hoi An city is the metropolis of kumquat trees with many large trees planted in big pots, attracting lot of visitors these days.
Mr. Nguyen Hoan having 20 years of experience in planting Kumquat trees said that almost entirely 400 kumquat growing households in the commune have prepared some pots aged around 10 years. They are offered for sale with the lowest price approximating VND20 million and the highest of VND60-70 million a pot.
Most of the products have been sold out to customers buying for sale in Da Nang city and Tam Ky city.
After the Tet holiday, customers can transport the trees back to the garden where they are sold and hire gardeners to take care of them for the following Tet holiday.
Mr. Nguyen Viet Ninh said that kumquat took them much time and effort. A tree is planted in soil for 4-5 years before being put in pots to take care of for another 1-2 years.  After the Tet, they usually repurchase the trees from customers to bring up for the next Tet holiday, he said.
At present, many people have arrived at Hue city to buy apricot blossom trees.
Mr. Nguyen Quang said that the apricot planted in Hue is called hoang mai or lap mai, considered to be a special product of Hue. It has five petals with pure and gentle scent. 
Price is traditionally higher than other types of apricot. An ancient tree with unique design might fetch hundreds to billion dong.
Locals have attempted to create unique bougainvillea pots with diversified designs and colors for the coming Tet holiday in Thanh Tien village, Phu Mau commune, Phu Vang district, Thua Thien-Hue province.
In Ha Tinh province, traders have streamed to Ngoc Son commune, Thanh Ha district to buy citrus fruits grown under VietGap quality standards, paying VND40,000 a kilogram.
Farmers Association in Ngoc Son said that the commune has farmed 170 hectares of citrus trees with bumper crop and good prices this year, likely to celebrate a warm and comfortable Tet holiday.
