My experience to learn English
Let me introduce myself for my first sharing. My name is Nghia Huynh Dinh, the most handsome friends of your teacher-Cephan. I am here today to share to you my experiences during my abroad study not to advertise for him.
In fact, I have just accomplished two years for Master degree in Indonesia in Mechanical Engineering. Before that, I have around four working years at foreigner hotel in District 1. Whatever I have to speaking, writing, listening and reading skill will be showed here for you.
First of all, language is not something to learn by heart. It should be used day by day to communicate and will bring us many advantages; we can remember the word, the accent, how to pronounce, the situation that can apply for, your instinctive reflex is also improved. Each day communicate with many people will take you to the right route that is not available in your language class.
In my working time in the above hotel, the biggest target is not the grammar, the reading skill or writing skill; that just only your reflex, your accent, pronounce and also your listening. You should make it easy like you talk in Vietnamese. So what I'd like to tell you for listening and speaking skills are TALK MORE, COMMUNICATE MORE AND LISTEN MORE AND MORE. 
To achieve that target, the English club center is also a good place for your practice, Cephan Club is as an example. In addition, if you cannot find the global environment or the foreigner person for practice and communicate, you can learn by yourself on film with and without subtitle. 
Even if you have a foreigner friend, who come from nation use English like native language, you also cannot hear the their voice with natural speed. What you can hear is somewhat they tried to talk slowly for us. In conclusion, for better communicate, you should be confidence first and TALK MORE-LISTEN MORE.
For READING and WRITING skills, actually, you should have pressure to practice it. If you are a student in international student's class, you MUST do it every day. If you are official staff, you have chance to work with foreigner people via email or contract, etc., your reading and writing HAVE TO improve and study by yourself by your foreigner words, their writing style. 
No one have the same way to write or express their ideas, and study from each of them will bring you the real application things. During my undergraduate time, I don't have chance to do it. There are no class teach me how to write the thesis, dissertation or report, how to compose an academic email, etc. 
You can also study it via books, internet but there is nothing be yours if you don't try to write by yourself. Self-study is an important factor for education in abroad. Pay attention in very detail will make you become English expert from time to time. 
In my case, there is many technical English words that I never used before, whenever I need I also try to translate to English. From that way, day by day, I get the name for mechanical tools, for the machine, structure mechanic or architect are also consumed well. 
The last things I wish to share here is KEEP YOUR SPIRIT AND YOUR DESIRE in English. Cause it will send you back many advantages in the future.
Many thanks and Best regard for reading my share!
