Vietnamese fulfill their dream of working for Facebook
More young Vietnamese people have grabbed opportunities to work for huge companies like Facebook. These are a few:
Mr Doan Hai Giang
1. Doan Hai Giang from Nghe An is now a software engineer of Facebook. He is also a co-founder and chair of HumanRank, a company in the US.
In September 2012, Giang applied to work for Facebook. In June 2013, he was admitted as an intern for three months. In August 2013, Giang applied for Google and got a job offer from Google two weeks later.
Giang was very happy that both giants, each of which receives more than 1 million applications each year, accepted him. Finally, he chose Facebook and became an official software engineer in May 2014.
2. After finishing general education in Vietnam, Nguyen Van Quang Huy flied to Singapore to study computer science at the National University of Singapore (NUS).
From Singapore, he sent an application to Facebook as per advice from a friend, who was an intern there. 
After three phone interview rounds with questions about algorithms, Huy successfully joined Facebook. 
At Facebook’s headquarters, Huy works in the Growth team, which specializes in processing notices that Facebook sends to users. The purpose of Growth is expanding the users’ community and strengthening connectivity of products.
Huy said he was deeply impressed by Facebook’s leaders, from Zuckerberg, Chris Cox, and Mike Schrep to Sheryl Sandberg, who all work hard and try to create the best possible products for users.
Huy likes the working environment where inspiring posters "Done is better than perfect" and "What would you do if you weren't afraid" are hung in many places.
3. Pham Van Hanh, a student of the University of Technology, is called the golden boy of Vietnam’s information technology.
He passed exams with excellent marks and defeated the competitors from many other countries to get opportunities to have internship at both Google and Facebook.
“Don’t think about how many people are competing with you,” he said.
Hanh is also famous for his statement “Other countries are just places for you to discover. Vietnam, the fatherland, is the place which you have a strong attachment to.”
Hanh has won many prizes and medals from domestic and international competitions, including the gold medal at the 2015 International Olympiad for Informatics (IOI) and the silver medal at APIO (Asia-Pacific Informatics Olympiad)
4. To work for Facebook, Nguyen Hai Khanh, who was a student at the IT Faculty of the HCMC University of Natural Sciences, had to refuse the annual pay of $100,000 offered by Google Australia.
Khanh chose Facebook because he had become used to the company’s environment after three months of internship. The US was also the target destination for Khanh. 
