Local consumers favor foreign-made products
Domestic consumers tend to favor products made in Thailand, South Korea and Japan and are becoming more hesitant to buy locally produced goods, according to results of a survey of high-quality Vietnamese products.
Local consumers scrutinize foreign products at a trade show in HCMC. Many Thai products are introduced in the local market and have attracted the interest of consumers - PHOTO: HUNG LE
According to the survey, released on January 30 by the Association of High-Quality Vietnamese Goods Producers, domestic products still dominate the local market as 51% of respondents said they prefer products made in Vietnam and 60% said they often consume local goods. However, the rates have now tumbled by 27 and 32 percentage points against last year.
Many Vietnamese enterprises’ trade fraud scandals have affected consumer confidence in Vietnamese brands such as the case involving Khaisilk. Meanwhile, prestigious brands must face even higher risks due to the ever-rising presence of copycats.
As such, foreign-made products can easily penetrate into the local market.
In addition, the number of consumers who prefer products imported from Thailand, South Korea and Japan tends to increase in the coming time.
Enterprises from these countries also understand Vietnamese customers who are fretful about the quality and safety of Chinese commodities. Besides, effective strategies have helped Thai, Korean and Japanese firms enter the Vietnamese market.
Products of these countries are becoming more popular in Vietnam. According to the survey, the proportion of products imported from Thailand, South Korea and Japan has increased from under 3% last year to 8-10% this year, or even 12-17% for confectionary and beverage products.
The popularity of Thai, Korean and Japanese products in Vietnam is thanks to the support of their retailers.
At present, Thai firms have owned the top four supermarket chains in Vietnam, including 19 Mega Market supermarkets, 32 Big C supermarkets, 75 B’s mart convenience stores and Robins supermarkets, let alone a stake of 49% in Nguyen Kim Trading JSC held by Central Group.
Meanwhile, Japanese products are distributed at Aeon malls, Saigon Centre and Family Mart and 7-Eleven convenience stores. Korean firms have launched Lotte and Emart supermarkets and GS25 convenience stores in Vietnam.
The survey also offers an insight into the rising trend of online shopping in Vietnam, pointing out that the trend has been more popular among young consumers in cities.
According to the survey, 2.7% of respondents said they shop online. This proportion, though still modest, is three times higher than the result found in the previous year, at 0.9%. 
The survey’s respondents mostly purchase consumer products online, especially electronic products, toys, sports equipment, cosmetics, beauty products, blankets, pillows, curtains, stationery and fashion products. However, online shoppers are young people born in and after 1980, and living in cities. 
In rural areas, online shopping is not common yet and has been confined to apparel and cosmetics.The trend is proven by data of commerce marketing technology company Criteo published on January 30.
Criteo’s analysis of online shopping habits of Vietnamese consumers in the 2017 Lunar New Year holiday showed that products like fashion and food obtained strong revenue growth on online shopping channels, with 86% and 51% respectively.
According to Criteo, shopping via mobile applications recorded higher sales growth than shopping via websites. Commercial businesses should hence spend their budget on the right platforms at the right time.
Alban Villani, regional general manager for Criteo in Southeast Asia, Hong Kong and Taiwan, said that in the Southeast Asian region, Vietnam ranked only behind Indonesia in terms of growth rate. This is understandable since Indonesia has a more developed e-commerce market that has received big investments from Japanese and Chinese businesses, and a large population.
However, e-commerce in Vietnam started not long ago, but is growing fast.
