Google co-founder Larry Page’s startup tests ‘Kitty Hawk’ flying car and it isn’t quite the technological revolution the world has been waiting for
It's hoped you won't need a pilot's license to drive the 'personal flying machine', which hovers five metres above the ground
THRILL seekers could get their hands on a “personal flying machine” by the end of this year.
Tech startup Kitty Hawk has released a video of its bizarre flying car prototype, which looks like a cross between a raft and a spiderweb.
The Kitty Hawk ‘Flyer’ will become available for sale by the end of 2017
The Silicon Valley based startup is reportedly backed by Google co-founder Larry Page.
It said it would be delivering its products to customers by the end of the year.
“Our mission is to make the dream of personal flight a reality. We believe when everyone has access to personal flight, a new, limitless world of opportunity will open up to them,” it wrote in a statement on its website.
Enjoy a flying car style ride by sitting on new Kitty Hawk Flyer 
A brave pilot takes off and hovers above a lake in a top secret location
Propelled by eight rotors, it takes off and lands vertically, like a helicopter.
It is said to weigh about 220 pounds (100 kilograms) and fly at speeds up to 25 miles per hour (40 kph) and can hover at 15 feet (4.5 metres) high.
The company describes the Flyer as "a new, all-electric aircraft," which is "safe, tested and legal to operate in the United States in uncongested areas".
No pilot's license is required, and two hours' training is said to be all that is needed.
Little details have been released about the Flyer, but the video reveals that it will be used above water
The website offered few details about the company, but several reports in recent months have said Page has poured millions of dollars into Kitty Hawk and another electric car startup.
Kitty Hawk president Sebastian Thrun, a Stanford University computer science professor who has been called the father of Google's self-driving car, tweeted: "Changing the future of personal transportation. Join us @kittyhawkcorp to get information about #theFlyer prototype."
The company announced it was offering three-year "memberships" for $100 (£78) to be placed on a waiting list and to get a discount on the price of the new transporter.
The price is to be announced later this year.
Keep your eyes peeled for another bizarre car contraption to hit UK streets in the near future.
The bizarre PodRide e-cycle (which looks like a toy car) is gearing up for an international launch.
Would you ride the PodRide? Designer Mikael Kjellman has been driving it to work for a year
