Sacombank’s former boss arrested for alleged fraud
 Local police on August 1 arrested Tram Be, former vice chairman of Saigon Thuong Tin Commercial Bank (Sacombank), and dozens of other bank executives for intentionally violating State regulations on economic management causing severe consequences.
According to the police, law enforcement agencies are dealing with a serious fraud case involving Tien Phong Bank, Sacombank, BIDV and Vietnam Construction Bank. Given the investigation results, the police decided to file formal charges against 25 people for deliberately violating State regulations on economic management causing serious consequences, with 16 of them detained under Article 165 of the Penal Code.
Meanwhile, the Department of Economic and Corruption Crime Investigation under the Ministry of Public Security initiated a formal probe into 58-year-old Tram Be, who formerly also served as chairman of the credit board of Sacombank, and the bank’s former CEO Phan Huy Khang.
The arrest warrants for Be and Khang were related to a fraud case at Vietnam Construction Bank, which also involved executives at other banks and resulted in the imprisonment of some executives including the bank’s former chairman Pham Cong Danh, who received a 30-year prison term for illegally withdrawing more than VND9 trillion.
According to the investigation, Danh visited Be in 2013 and asked him for help to borrow VND1.8 trillion from Sacombank for the former’s six companies. Be agreed to lend the amount, demanding that the Vietnam Construction Bank’s money deposited at Sacombank be used as collateral for the loan.
He in person accompanied Danh to meet Khang, and ordered the then CEO to let Danh borrow the money. The loan documents were signed off on by Be on April 25, 2013.
As Danh’s companies failed to pay the debt, Sacombank took VND1.8 trillion from the Vietnam Construction Bank and an additional VND35 billion in interest. The police concluded that Be and 14 other employees of Sacombank broke the law by allowing Danh to borrow.
The State Bank of Vietnam, however, at the time said the loan did not cause financial losses to Sacombank and asked that the group be exempt from criminal charges.
The central bank then forced Be to resign as vice chairman of Sacombank in February.
Sacombank in a notice released on August 1 afternoon insisted that the lender incurred no losses from the fraud case. Sacombank fully recovered the credit and interest from Danh’s six companies in April 2014.
Besides, Be and Khang had assumed no senior roles at Sacombank since February 23 and July 3 respectively.
Speaking to the Daily, Sacombank Chairman Duong Cong Minh said Sacombank’s liquidity is better than ever. “We’ve just heard about (the arrest of) Tram Be and Phan Huy Khang on the mass media. Currently, Sacombank is operating normally with liquidity better than ever. Sacombank’s inter-bank borrowing has declined steadily since the beginning of July thanks to increasing mobilization from citizens and economic organizations.”
In addition, after the news about the arrests broke, a representative from the central bank contacted Sacombank providing guidelines and cooperating with the lender. The official also pledged to support Sacombank in case of trouble.
