Useful IELTS Reading Resources
Bored with learning English from textbooks? Let’s try some engaging learning resources! Apart from practice tests, English newspapers and magazines are also useful IELTS reading resources to improve your reading skills. Actually, many IELTS reading articles are selected from them. Here is a list of magazines for you to develop your English reading habit as well as get familiar with the language and the content in IELTS reading.
Science and Technology
Science and Technology is a common topic in IELTS Academic reading. It is perhaps the most difficult topic in reading because it involves more technical terms, so spend some time on reading the following magazines.
New Scientist is an international science magazine from UK. Some reading passages, such as Flawed Beauty: the Problem with Toughened Glass in Cambridge IELTS books, are actually past IELTS exam papers are selected from this magazine. If you have limited time, just skim the recommended articles on the home page!
Scientific American and American Scientist are two popular American science magazines. They also include health and education articles which are helpful for IELTS Academic reading. Scientific American offers hundreds of 60-second science talk podcasts which are also great resources for practicing listening.
Politics, Economy and Culture
These are another three frequent topics in IELTS reading. Here are two recommended magazines providing the latest news and articles on these topics.
Keep up with the latest news on different parts of the world! There are various topics on BBC News and you can also watch the one-minute world news videos on the website to improve listening skills.
The Economist is another common source for IELTS reading. Many articles in the past exams are from this magazine. Besides, it contains a debate page which has several hot topics such as should businesses work to advance the rights of LGBT people broadly, rather than focusing only on their own employees? Read the different views under each topic, try to give your own views and write down an essay outline. It will be a good practice for your writing skill!
Geography, Environment, Travel and History
These topics are also likely to be included in IELTS reading. Here are some great magazines for you!
National Geographic contains articles about geography, animals, culture, environment, travel and adventure which are common topics for both IELTS Academic and General Training reading.
History Extra and History Net are two great history magazine websites with podcasts, articles and reviews on different events and eras in the history. Try some of them to improve your reading and listening skills!
For those who take the General Training version of the test, you can read the advertisements, notices and jobs on the magazines as well because reading section one and section two may include these topics.
