These are the skyscrapers that could be coming to a city near you soon and they include tower blocks built like trees and towers clinging to mountainsides
From skyscrapers in mountains and trees to futuristic skyscrapers for London and New York
THESE spectacular designs show how architects have masterminded new building concepts for the future.
From skyscrapers in mountains and trees, futuristic skyscrapers for London and New York and the “Heal-Berg” – a “reverse climate changing machine”.
High Density Urban Order in London
Flexible Materials Skyscraper in New York
The Silver Lining: Reconstructing Post-War Syria
Pod Vending Machine Skyscraper
Heal-Berg: Reverse Climate Changing Machine
Genesis Mars Skyscraper
Giant Sequoia Skyscraper
Human Castell
The images were all entries in the eVolo 2017 Skyscraper Competition which invites architects, students, engineers, designers, and artists from around the world for visionary ideas for future living.
First place was awarded to Pawel LipiAski and Mateusz Frankowski from Poland for the project Mashambas Skyscraper.
Second place was Vertical Factories in Megacities designed by Tianshu Liu and Linshen Xie from the United States. Third place was Javier López-Menchero Ortiz de Salazar from Spain for the project Espiral3500. The project takes the streets and complexity of the city’s horizontal plane and puts it into a spiraling vertical structure.
First place awarded to Pawel LipiAski and Mateusz Frankowski from Poland for the project Mashambas Skyscraper
Inside the first place skyscraper. 
The design proposes a modular and scalable skyscraper conceived as an educational centre and marketplace for new agricultural communities in sub-Saharan Africa.
Vertical Factories in Megacities designed by Tianshu Liu and Linshen Xie from the United States received second place
Third place is Javier López-Menchero Ortiz de Salazar from Spain for the project Espiral3500
The project introduces the streets and complexity of the city’s horizontal plane into a spiraling vertical structure.
Mountain Skyscraper in Yosemite
Sustainable Urban Mining Factory Skyscraper
Vertical Traditional Chinese Village. Honourable Mention
The Forgotten Memorials: The Utopian Future of Urbanization
Adaptive Capacity: A Socio-ecological Vertical Community in Tanzania
City Skyscraper – these designs represent entries in the eVolo 2017 Skyscraper Competition
Data Cemetery Skyscraper
Wind Skyscraper
Arch Skyscraper
In Two Minds: Magnetic Cemetery
Dubai is planning a rotating skyscraper for 2020 and it's pretty epic.
