Fertilizer from earthworms: product for organic agriculture
Earthworms (Perionyx excavates) can easily be used to make biological products and fertilizer for sustainable organic agriculture.
Le Minh Vuong, head of the group, said they were now carrying out agricultural projects related to earthworms.
Scientists pointed out that organic fertilizer from earthworms not only helps improve the quality of soil, but also helps plants resist disease, especially root diseases. 
The fertilizer is suitable for all kinds of crops, helping increase the ability to absorb nutrients, retain moisture in soil and increase the germination rate of seeds.
To take full advantage of earthworms, The He Uu Tu is carrying out a project on earthworm breeding and making microbial organic fertilizer from dragon fruit by-products.
In Phong Phu commune of Tuy Phong district in Binh Thuan province, farmers grow dragon fruits on a large scale to earn their living. In high harvesting season, every hectare of dragon fruits can generate 550 tons of waste (flowers, twigs and pruned fruit).  
From now on, the waste will not be thrown away, because it will be used by Vuong and The He Uu Tu’s members to create biological fertilizer.
“The waste from dragon fruit and agricultural waste, after being processed, will become biological fertilizer. This will be an abundant source of fertilizer supply which can help protect the environment and develop sustainable agriculture,” Vuong said.
The agricultural waste from dragon fruit will decompose to create feed for earthworms. After 50-60 days of decomposition, the biomass from earthworms will be used as organic fertilizer for crops.
In addition, earthworms can also be bred with waste from biogas tanks in livestock farms and shrimp ponds. This is a source of feed for earthworms.
According to Vuong, it takes farmers 17 months to take back the investment capital spent on facilities, breeders and labor. 
Dang Thi Thuc, an earthworm supplier in HCM City, said that farmers do not need to apply complicated technical solutions to breed earthworms. He said earthworm fertilizer and biological products made from earthworms could be the future for sustainable organic agriculture in Vietnam.
Tran Thi Be, a young farmer in Cu Chi district in HCM City, provides 300 tons of earthworm fertilizer to the market, mostly to southern provinces.
