Rift Valley Fever could be 'next Zika' as global warming forces insects to carry African disease to Europe
The virus - transmitted by mosquitos - may cause a widespread epidemic as climate change allows the insects to travel further in search of temperate regions.
Historically, the dangerous virus was only found in central Africa
A lethal African virus could spark a pandemic in Europe due to global warming.
Rift Valley fever is transmitted by mosquitos and contact with infected animals - and may follow the Ebola and Zika viruses by causing a widespread epidemic.
Climate change allows the insects which carry it to extend their geographic range to temperate regions - like Europe and the US.
Scientists fear it has the potential to follow the pattern of Dengue virus or West Nile virus which have reached southern Europe in recent years.
There are no vaccines or treatments available for use in humans
Most infection in humans are relatively mild suffering flu like symptoms.
But a small percentage of patients develop a much more severe and fatal form of the disease causing neurological disorders, partial or complete blindness, haemorrhagic fever, or thrombosis.
Now a Scottish team has made a significant step towards understanding Rift Valley Fever Virus (RVFV) which causes frequent outbreaks in Africa.
Biologists Dr Michal Barski and Dr Uli Schwarz-Linek, of the University of St Andrews, and colleagues at the University of Glasgow, identified its key molecule - offering hope of a cure or vaccine.
Historically, the virus was only found in central Africa but has spread to the Arabian Peninsula.
Rift Valley fever is transmitted by mosquitos
There are no vaccines or treatments available for use in humans so if there is a serious outbreak of the virus it could become an epidemic and cause great economic loss.
Dr Barski said: "With this research we have opened up a new avenue for understanding Rift Valley fever virus and hopefully also for developing therapy targeted at this virus.
"The recent, sudden epidemics of Ebola virus and Zika virus have highlighted the need to understand dangerous tropical viral diseases which could quickly spread to far away places.
"Rift Valley fever is on that very short list of viruses which might cause large epidemics next."
The study published in eLife combined two scanning techniques, NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography, carried out at Diamond Light Source, the UK's giant synchrotron lab about the size of Wembley Stadium near Didcot, Oxfordshire.
A serious outbreak of the virus could become an epidemic
Dr Barski and colleagues revealed the atomic three dimensional structure of NSs - the virus' main chemical which assembles into large fibres inside infected cells.
The virus relies on NSs to cause disease but the mechanism behind this process, and the formation of the fibres, have not been fully understood.
The structure of this molecule revealed that only the central part, or core domain, of the protein is needed for the fibres to form.
Further experiments identified how NSs molecules come together to build the fibres inside the infected cells.
Dr Uli Schwarz-Linek said: "The structural insights we generated will help to unravel the complexity of Rift Valley fever.
"It will pave the way for research on Rift Valley fever virus and many other related viruses that have the ability to infect animals and humans."
The findings mark an important step towards understanding how the NSs protein helps RVFV to cause disease in humans and livestock.
In the future, this work may aid the development of much needed drugs and vaccines against RVFV.
Earlier this year the World Health Organisation ranked RVFV among the ten most dangerous pathogens most likely to cause wide epidemics in the near future, requiring urgent attention.
Diamond works like a giant microscope, harnessing the power of electrons to produce bright light scientists can use to study anything from fossils to jet engines to viruses and vaccines.
It is among the most advanced scientific facilities in the world.
