France’s Alstom wins first metro system contract in Vietnam
A consortium led by French rail transport equipment provider Alstom signed Tuesday a contract with a Hanoi transport agency to supply technology and equipment for a metro line in the Vietnamese capital.
In its first-ever integrated metro system contract in Vietnam, Alstom, as the leader of a consortium with Colas Rail and Thales, will provide a metro system for the Hanoi Metro Line 3, so that it can start commercial operation in 2021.
Alstom’s share of the contract is worth around €190 million (US$230.22 million), the French company said in a press release the same day.
The 12.5km Hanoi Metro Line 3 is the second metro line under construction in the capital city.
As part of this contract, 12 stations and one depot at Nhon for train maintenance will be built, according to Alstom.
Once operational, the line is expected to carry 8,600 people per hour and per direction (PPHPD). This capacity will be progressively increased within ten years after its operation commencement.
Alstom will supply and integrate the metro system which is composed of 10 Metropolis trainsets, Urbalis 400, Alstom’s CBTC  solution which controls train movement, enabling them to run at higher frequencies and speeds in total safety, as well as the power supply and depot equipment together with Colas Rail.
“In the context of the France-Vietnam collaboration, we are delighted to sign this contract which aims to improve Hanoi’s transportation system and reduce the growing traffic in the city,” said Jean-François Beaudoin, senior vice president with Alstom Asia Pacific.
“With its advanced and sustainable technology and 16 years’ expertise in metro integrated solutions, Alstom is the preferred partner to provide Vietnam with a greener and smarter transportation system.”
The project will involve six Alstom sites in France, Valenciennes, Saint-Ouen, Le Creusot, Tarbes, Ornan and Villeurbanne.
Alstom, which is the world’s leader in the supply of integrated urban mobility systems, has been awarded 18 integrated metro projects in over a decade in cities such as Singapore (Circle Line), Guadalajara (Mexico), Dubai (UAE), Riyadh (KSA), Los Teques (Venezuela), and Panama (Metro Line 1&2).
