Hoang Sa mini-submarine has successful trial run
Hoa has met many difficulties with his first submarine – Truong Sa 1. Though it attracted special attention from the public, Hoa did not receive the strong support he expected from state management agencies. 
The Ministry of Science & Technology stated that all scientific research works and inventions are welcome. 
However, Hoa did not know whom he had to contact to get the license to try Truong Sa 1 on the sea.
It took Hoa one year and a lot of money to work out on the design of Hoang Sa, as it has has many advanced features.
The businessman said Hoang Sa mini sub is designed with many modern features. 
Hoang Sa can go on mud and shoals, and operate under the sea for many days. It can go to the sea without tides, and automatically escape shoals and operate like a normal floating ship when moving underwater.
It allows long-distance communication under the sea for many days and is equipped with an underwater camera system, computer-guiding system and optical camera.
Hoang Sa will be made of the same materials as Truong Sa 1 and their sizes will be nearly the same. 
“Hoang Sa will inherit the best features from Truong Sa 1 and have new features as well,” Hoa said. “This will be a special ship which will never be stranded.”
When asked about the trial process, Hoa said he tried Hoang Sa in a tank at a depth of 4 meters on September 24. He needs 20 more days to fix some problems.
“Hoang Sa is a mini submarine with many new and complicated features. It will take more time to try it,” he said. 
He wants to create a submarine which can help protect the sovereignty of Vietnamese territorial waters.
Hoa’s both models, Hoang Sa and Truong Sa 1, bear the name of the islands on the East Sea – Paracel and Spratly archipelagos.
Besides Hoang Sa and Truong Sa 1, Hoa is working on Truong Sa 2.
Truong Sa 1 has been seen by representatives from many agencies, including the Science & Technology and the Environment Committee, Thai Binh provincial Science & technology and Hai Phong Naval Technical Institute.
