How to Learn English Effectively in 5 Minutes Every Day- 5 Suggestions from Ce Phan
Congratulations! I know every minute counts and 5 minutes of your time could be extremely important. However, you could make use of this valuable time to learn English and even if you are quite busy to make it a habit to learn. I usually spend that short break to read something in English and it has become my habit, and making use of my time focusing and designing relevant programs for online learners. I’ve prepared this article just for you!
Many people said that they need to spend a lot of time to learn English and become better English learners. They believe that it is impossible to learn some useful things in a short period considering break times. Their excuses explain why they haven’t started to learn English. 
There is a famous quote: “There's nothing like BUSY, It’s all about PRIORITIES”. It happened to you when you focused too much of your time working and could not care about anything else. It also shows that you are getting busier and it’s even harder to spend hours to learn a language as you wished. 
These guidelines or tips aren’t for those who are up to their necks working and so busy to care about English. I know you never want to spend that time to search for “a method to learn English for busy people”, but if by chance you came across this writing, consider the possibilities on how you can spend 5 minutes to learn English every day, then continue browsing and check out the guidelines below.
In the past lessons that I prepared for students in 2014, I shared 9 ideas to learn English in 5 minutes. But these ideas are no longer suitable for the current situations in Vietnam when Vietnamese still find it hard to learn some things which are not really close to their interests. For 3 years I’ve been working with CEP staff and co-teachers, CEP Education has improved completely and continues to develop new techniques and programs suitable for learners of today. Please check our website (cep.com.vn) and discover new ways to learn English. Read closely the 5 most distinct and recommended ways to improve your English:
1. Read an Article in English
There are about 500 to 1600 words in an article listed for 3 different levels of readers: beginner (basic), intermediate, and advanced. You can find interesting articles easily in cep.com.vn.news base on your reading ability. I know, some of you still concern about reading those words in English, but I’m sure you will never find it hard because you can open and read the translation for each paragraph or check the meaning of the single words as well. 
A special feature of this program is that you can see the list of keywords and phrases down below the article. Moreover, you will also see the external link/s to read similar articles or related articles of the same topic. 
2. Read a Fable or a Short Topic
Reading fables or fairy tales may not be a routine if you are over 13 years old. However, there are some people who still have some good reasons to continue reading fables. They enjoy reading them because they have moral values and good lessons to learn which can be applied on their lives and daily activities.
For example, the virtue of patience, diligence, or belief in what we can achieve are recreated metaphorically in many fables. It is considered to be "the ageless stories". That means anyone can read and learn good lessons in life.
If you are looking for short writing samples (with lengths of about 10-15 sentences) about particular topics, just refer to the category with "English topics". You can learn few ideas and apply them to your presentation on a topic. There are about 300 short topics which are compiled and translated into Vietnamese.
Each topic offers an audio function and takes you about 1 minute to listen, 2 minutes to read, and 2 minutes to remember the ideas. I have spent about 6 months to learn by heart about 50 topics since I studied English by myself 10 years ago. But of course, I haven’t stopped and still continue to read more topics, though I could speak English quite well. I’m not sure if I can remember all the topics now, but I can use many ideas or terms from them and communicate easily with people about 200 popular topics. 
3. Make Examples and Use Flashcards
It's completely new and different with most of learning methods from other language schools or online learning programs. Learners practice by writing examples using the phrases in each flashcard and gain proficiency in using English keywords. This is also the regular activities that most of CEP students do with their learning routine. Initially, I introduced the album with 1000 flashcards for 1000 common English phrases. Then, I launched a new platform (vobmapping.vn) for everyone who wants to practice when there are higher demands of learning by this way.
All you need to do is to read the flashcard with the keywords or common phrases, and then check the sample example on the Flashcards. Sometimes, you also find some collocations linked in there to see more similar phrases. To remember 1000 common phrases, I always tell students to write down their own examples using these phrases and repeat them afterward.
It is estimated that you can learn 800 flashcards in 6 months when you spend 5 minutes every day. I showed the demonstration in an article on Vnexpress newspaper, that if you can remember the first 1000 common English phrases, then you can speak English easily.
4. Discuss With People on Facebook
I have written at least 3 posts to encourage you to learn writing by making comments in English on Facebook. You can do a self-study by giving attention to English posts. One of the weaknesses of most Vietnamese students is that they rarely spend time to practice writing. You prefer to watch, listen, read, but don’t want to write. So, I think you should have the habit of writing in English if you want to gain confidence in writing.
Only few students have dared to practice English this way and some told me that they don't want their friends know what they are doing with English on Facebook. If it happens to me, I may open a new account just for learning English, or set up the private functions for what you do on Facebook. 
Now, I am guiding you how to transfer your ideas to a comment: your paragraph will present your main points and it starts with a topic sentence + Supporting ideas (you will explain your thought at first and give reasons) + An example if you think your explanation is not clear enough + you may need a concession to finalize your paragraph (or it can be a summary or a conclusion).
5. Perfect Your English With Timeline Learning
With 4 above suggestions, you can pursue to learn English for a long term with only 5 minutes a day. However, sometimes you have more free time, such as: waiting for the bus or being delayed for flights and having time on weekends. Then you have more chances to reach the comprehensive learning program which is designed by CEP. Our learning website really achieves the successful records from thousands of learners using per day.
There are about 1,000 students spending an average of 30 minutes to 60 minutes for each visit on our Timeline learning system every day. Approximately 30% of users spend less time to participate in the lessons (It's hard for them to complete all seven lessons there). The remaining majority of users access the site from the social networking sites (Facebook, Youtube...) or search tools (Google, Bing ..). They seem not be able to fully understand the features of this program and exit the platform within 1 minute.
With a quick visit, you will find it hard to understand the method of learning with this new approach. So, you should read the guidelines carefully and check the explanation, too before you immerse yourself to the world of language with the weekly updated topics.
    1. Key words
    2. Common phrases
    3. Questions for discussion
    4. Listen to a story 
    5. Speak with sample ideas 
    6. Read news in English-Vietnamese
    7. Describe charts and write essays
To conclude, there are many people who once gave up their learning schedule, the majority of them are not interested in the English lessons including lessons in the classroom and on online sites. I am glad to introduce a new approach of learning English that you can learn easily anytime, anywhere, and especially you can follow the stream of language using many attractive posts.
Tell us your thoughts below this article or share these ideas to your friends. I’ll give you a special GIFT with the album of 100 Flashcards that you can learn on your phone, or computer. It's a great start for your English learning routine, so contact Ce Phan fan page now to receive your lessons. 
