Two more Vietnamese athletes qualified for Olympics
A race walker and a wrestler have become the eighth and ninth Vietnamese athletes to win a berth at the Rio 2016 Olympic Games, as they both exhibited good performances in two separate Asian qualification events on Sunday.
Nguyen Thanh Ngung met the Olympic qualifying standard as he clocked 1:23:29 in the men’s 20km event at the 2016 Asian Race Walking Championships in the Japanese city of Nomi.
The Vietnamese race walker only finished seventh in the race, but his result already exceeded the standard of 1:24:00 to secure an Olympic berth.
Ngung also smashed Vietnam’s national record of 1:24:30 he set six years ago.
Duong Duc Thuy, head of the track-and-field division at the General Department of Sports and Physical Training, said Ngung’s winning the ticket to Brazil this summer is a huge surprise.
Vietnam’s race walking had pinned all of its hope on the shoulders of Nguyen Thi Thanh Phuc, who is Ngung’s older sister, but the female walker broke a rule during her competition.
Phuc, Vietnam’s best female race walker, still has another chance to seek an Olympic spot at the Singapore Open Track & Field Championships, to take place on April 28-29.
In the meantime, female wrester Vu Thi Hang also grabbed a ticket to Rio as she advanced to the finale of the women’s 48kg category at the 2016 Asian Wrestling Olympic Qualification Tournament.
The event in Kazakhstan was the second regional qualifying tournament for the 2016 Olympics, with the top two wrestlers in each weight class given an Olympic qualification spot.
The 24-year-old Vietnamese wrestler was therefore qualified for the Games, even though she lost 2-3 to host rival Zhuldyz Eshimova in the final competition.
A fellow of Hang’s, Nguyen Thi Lua, has also booked an Olympic place after she grabbed the women’s 53kg silver medal in Kazakhstan on Friday.
As of Monday, Vietnam has had a total of nine athletes qualified for the 2016 Olympic Games, running from August 5 to 21 in Rio de Janeiro.
The other athletes include swimmer Nguyen Thi Anh Vien, and shooters Hoang Xuan Vinh and Tran Quoc Cuong.
Vietnam is entitled to send three weightlifters to the Games, but has yet to decide who will be chosen.
The Southeast Asian country has never won an Olympic medal since 2008, when weightlifter Hoang Anh Tuan snatched a silver in Beijing.
