Vietnam U23 prepare to take on Qatar in semi-finals
Vietnam U23’s head coach Park Hang-seo has admitted that his players were completely exhausted after three difficult matches in the group stage with the Republic of Korea, Australia and Syria. However, in the quarterfinals with Iraq late Saturday, Park’s side had no signs of fatigue.
Vietnam still stayed firm for 120 minutes before knocking down the title favourite Iraqis in the penalty shootout. (Credit: AFC) 
Against strong opponents playing long ball as Iraq U23, Vietnam U23 still stayed firm for 120 minutes before knocking down their rivals in the penalty shootout. Vietnam’s squad surprised the title favourite Iraqis by their strength and endurance.
This is one of the biggest differences of the Korean head coach compared to his predecessors as he helps his players, not only play confidently, but also maintain strength in all 90 or even 120 minutes.
Previously the Vietnamese team almost did not have a break during training when competing in a formal tournament. However, Park Hang-seo is different. After the 0-0 draw with Syria U23, the Korean coach decided to let the team free from training despite they had a difficult upcoming match against Iraq U23. Instead, he allowed his players go to the sauna and use hydrotherapy to recover. Then, Vietnamese players had a dinner outside, at a restaurant in Changshu (Jiangsu, China), instead of eating at the hotel.
After the 120 minute game and then the tense shootout with Iraq, Park continued to "refresh" the team in his own way. Vietnam U23 were present in Changzhou on Sunday morning after two hours of traveling from Changshu. Coach Park has asked his players to return seriously in preparation for the semi-final against Qatar, but he still gave the players a training break on Sunday afternoon.
Those who had played the quarterfinals were going to the sauna and undergoing physiotherapy. The remaining were required to practice at gym centres strengthen physical strength. Vietnam U23 will have a sole training session on Monday afternoon at the Changzhou Sports Centre.
The team has been promised to be rewarded an additional VND500 million in rewards from the Vietnam Professional Football Joint Stock Company ahead of their match next Tuesday. The semifinal with Qatar U23 will take place at 15:00 in Changzhou on January 23 (Hanoi time).
