Vietnamese to take part in design of new nuclear reactor
VietNamNet Bridge - Vietnamese scientists will team up with foreign engineers to design and build the first nuclear reactor in Vietnam. 
Dien said current conditions are different from that of 30 years ago, when Vietnam’s nuclear engineering was underdeveloped. 
To improve the Da Lat nuclear reactor, Vietnam in the past signed a turn-key contract with the former Soviet Union. The Soviet Union’s partners undertook all necessary work to upgrade the reactor, from the design to construction, and handed it over to Vietnam after all works were completed. This was a big problem which prevented Vietnamese scientists from approaching nuclear technologies.
According to Dien, the construction of the new nuclear science and technology center is a great opportunity for Vietnam to obtain more knowledge about nuclear technologies. The participation of Vietnamese scientists should be encouraged.
During Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung’s visit to Russia in late 2009, Dung and the Russian Prime Minister agreed on a plan under which Russia would help Vietnam build a nuclear science and technology center at the estimated cost of $500 million. 
The new nuclear reactor, expected to have the capacity of 15 MW, would replace the current Da Lat 500 KW reactor, which has been operating for the last 50 years and will stop operating in 10 years.
However, Vietnam still has not chosen the site for the reactor. 
The Lam Dong provincial authorities suggested building the reactor in Da Nhim commune of Lac Duong district, about 35 kilometers from Da Lat City. 
The science ministry wants to set up a center in the Hon Bo mountain area which is just seven kilometers far from the Da Lat’s center.
The provincial authorities do not want to have a reactor in the area suggested by the science ministry for fear of security problems as the area is near residential quarters.
As Lam Dong is afraid of a nuclear reactor, Dong Nai province has been eyed instead. Dien said Suoi Tre and Hang Gon communes in the province, which is 50 kilometers from HCM City, are being considered.
Dien noted that it is very difficult to find places which can satisfy requirements on environmental and geographical conditions, security and labor force for a nuclear reactor.
A suggested place in Cam My district in Dong Nai province has been rejected because of its location near the future Long Thanh Airport.
