Documents in the Paradise Papers leak show the identities of taxpayers who moved assets worth tens of millions of pounds into companies in Mauritius.
The tax avoidance schemes involve them claiming to no longer own property, cash and investments in order to keep their fortunes out of reach of HMRC.
It appears many of them use the companies like personal bank accounts.
This allows them to continue to enjoy the benefit of their hidden riches.
Mark Faulkner and his partner Harriet Logan moved more than £28m in cash and assets to a Mauritian company called Babington PCC.
Officially they have given away their fortune, but the Paradise Papers documents show they could still control how cash was spent because they acted as "investment advisers" to Babington.
They have advised the offshore company to buy a £3.25m country mansion, properties in London, a brand new Aston Martin, an art collection, a collection of classic photographs and a cellar of vintage wines.
It also owned their holiday home in Florida, funded the upkeep of another holiday home in the south of France, paid for trips to New York and Miami, and spent more than £100,000 a year funding Mr Faulkner's hobby of classic yacht racing.
Mr Faulkner, a former banker, and ex-war photographer Ms Logan contributed £1.6m of the offshore money to the "Education Purpose Trust" - which would then fund their four children's entire private education.
Mr Faulkner initially denied putting any money into the Mauritian company, but his lawyers later told BBC Panorama that while they did not accept our assertions, they have "now commenced dialogue with HMRC to review the arrangements that their previous advisers had recommended".
Investment adviser
The tax avoidance schemes were administered by Appleby, the law firm at the centre of the Paradise Papers leak.
They were set up by James O'Toole, a British lawyer who has made his own fortune by advising the wealthy how to dodge tax.
The documents show that Mr O'Toole has personally used a similar type of tax avoidance scheme to his clients.
Mr O'Toole even advised his offshore company to use his tax-free cash to pay for his own personal shopper.
Some of the cash came from the huge fees he charges clients.
Panorama asked Mr O'Toole whether he had declared this income to HMRC.
Mr O'Toole's lawyer said the allegations are "ill-judged and unsupported by any relevant evidence".
In a statement on the Paradise Papers, Appleby said it was a law firm which operates in jurisdictions regulated to the highest international standards and "advises clients on legitimate and lawful ways to conduct their business".
